project specific example (#59)
d3b-center/annoFuse: vignettes/putative_driver_filtering.Rmd

---
title: >

>   Putative Driver filtering

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Putative Oncogenic Driver Fusion Filtering
```

author:
- name: Krutika Gaonkar
  affiliation: 
  - &id1 Center for Data-Driven Discovery in Biomedicine, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, USA
  email: gaonkark@chop.email.edu
- name: Federico Marini
  affiliation: 

>   - &id2 Institute of Medical Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics (IMBEI), Mainz
>   - Center for Thrombosis and Hemostasis (CTH), Mainz

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - &id2 Institute of Medical Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics (IMBEI), Mainz, Germany
  - Center for Thrombosis and Hemostasis (CTH), Mainz, Germany
```

  email: marinif@uni-mainz.de
date: "`r Sys.Date()`"
package: "`r paste('annoFuse', packageVersion('annoFuse'))"
output: 
  html_document:
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
    number_sections: true
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{Putative driver filtering}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}  
  %\VignettePackage{annoFuse}
  %\VignetteKeywords{Software, Transcription, Visualization, GeneExpression, Annotation,
    GeneFusionDetection, GUI, ReportWriting}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE} 
knitr::opts_chunk$set(warning = FALSE, message = FALSE)
```

# Introduction

> In this vignette we demonstrate using annoFuse, to filter putative oncogene fusion from a filtered fusion list (filtered fusion list `FilteredFusionAnnoFuse.tsv` was obtained for v16 OpenPBTA files : `fusion_standardization` -> `fusion_filtering_QC` -> `annotate_fusion_calls` ) and also plot recurrent fusion, recurrently fused genes, and summary plot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this vignette, we demonstrate how to use annoFuse to filter putative oncogenic fusions from a filtered fusion list.
The filtered fusion list `FilteredFusionAnnoFuse.tsv` was obtained from the v16 release of [OpenPBTA](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis).
The steps are: `fusion_standardization` -> `fusion_filtering_QC` -> `annotate_fusion_calls`, followed by plotting recurrent fusions, recurrently fused genes, as well as a summary plot.
```

NOTE: `FilteredFusionAnnoFuse.tsv` is not in OpenPBTA - do we need to change this to describe data in the package?

Author: I meant to say v16 starfusion , arriba and expression files, the FilteredFusionAnnoFuse.tsv file in created as we run annoFuse functions over these files.

Reviewer: ok perfect - you can update then, and also add the release date please

# Step by step analysis

We start by loading `annoFuse` and the other required packages in the chunk below

```{r}
library("annoFuse")
suppressPackageStartupMessages(library("readr"))
suppressPackageStartupMessages(library("dplyr"))
suppressPackageStartupMessages(library("qdapRegex"))
```

```{r}
fusion_calls <- read_tsv(system.file("extdata", "FilteredFusionAnnoFuse.tsv", package = "annoFuse"))

# distance are being removed here to capture all intergenic fusions in count
# distance within () were making them count as unique instead of the same fusion
fusion_calls$FusionName <- unlist(lapply(
  fusion_calls$FusionName, 
  function(x) rm_between(x, "(", ")", extract = FALSE)
))

print("Raw calls from STARfusion and Arriba for PBTA")
table(fusion_calls$Caller)
```

> These high quality fusion calls are considered known and putative oncogenic driver fusions if the fusion is previously reported in TCGA or fusions containing gene partners that are known oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, COSMIC genes, or transcription factors. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the fusion has been previously reported in TCGA or if fusions containing gene partners are known oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, COSMIC genes, and/or transcription factors, then we consider the fusion call to be known oncogenic or putative oncogenic. 
```

```{r}
# aggreate caller to unique fusion calls per Sample
fusion_calls <- aggregate_fusion_calls(fusion_calls, removeother = FALSE)

> # gene list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Add reference gene list containing known oncogenes, tumor suppressors, kinases, and transcription factors
```

geneListReferenceDataTab <- read.delim(
  system.file("extdata", "genelistreference.txt", package = "annoFuse"),
  stringsAsFactors = FALSE
)

> # fusion list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Add fusion list containing previously reported oncogenic fusions.
```

fusionReferenceDataTab <- read.delim(
  system.file("extdata", "fusionreference.txt", package = "annoFuse"),
  stringsAsFactors = FALSE
)

# filter for driver fusions
putative_driver_fusions <- fusion_driver(
  standardFusioncalls = fusion_calls, 
  annotated = TRUE, 
  geneListReferenceDataTab = geneListReferenceDataTab, 
  fusionReferenceDataTab = fusionReferenceDataTab
)
```

> Putative Driver Fusions that are found in more than 4 histologies were removed from further processing as these fusions are considered artifact or commonly occurring from manual review.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Putative Driver Fusions found in more than four distinct histologies were filtered out, as these fusions were considered likely artifactual.
```

```{r}
# checking if fusions are called in multiple histologies

> # this will suggest these fusion calls are artifact or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# this will suggest these fusion calls are artifactual or
```

# commonly occuring
found_in_morethan_4 <- groupcount_fusion_calls(
  putative_driver_fusions, 
  group = "broad_histology", 
  numGroup = 4
) %>% 
  arrange(desc(group.ct))

found_in_morethan_4
```

> Other non-oncogenic (not annotated as oncogene/transcription factor/ TSG /kinase) fusions that are recurrent fusions called by both callers and unique to specific histology in this filtered dataset were of interest as well. 
> 
> However, non-oncogenic genes that are fused more than 5 times per sample were removed since we consider these are artifacts within our dataset from manual review of these fusions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other non-oncogenic (not annotated as oncogene/transcription factor/tumor suppressor gene/kinase) fusions that are recurrent fusions, called by both callers, and are unique to a specific histology in this filtered dataset are of interest as well. 

However, non-oncogenic genes that are fused more than five times per sample were removed, as they were considered artifactual within our dataset from manual review. 
```

# Remove
# 1. non-oncogenic fusions that are in > numGroup
group.count <- groupcount_fusion_calls(fusion_calls, 
                                       group = "broad_histology", 
                                       numGroup = 1)

# 2. non-oncogenic multi-fused genes
fusion_recurrent5_per_sample <- fusion_multifused(fusion_calls, 
                                                  limitMultiFused = 5)

# filter fusion_calls to keep recurrent fusions from above sample.count and fusion_calls.summary
QCGeneFiltered_recFusion <- fusion_calls %>%
  dplyr::filter(FusionName %in% unique(c(sample.count$FusionName, fusion_calls.summary$FusionName)))

# filter QCGeneFiltered_recFusion to remove fusions found in more than 1 group and multifused gene per samples
QCGeneFiltered_recFusionUniq <- QCGeneFiltered_recFusion %>%
  dplyr::filter(!FusionName %in% group.count$FusionName) %>%
  dplyr::filter(!Gene1A %in% fusion_recurrent5_per_sample$GeneSymbol |
    !Gene2A %in% fusion_recurrent5_per_sample$GeneSymbol |
    !Gene1B %in% fusion_recurrent5_per_sample$GeneSymbol |
    !Gene2B %in% fusion_recurrent5_per_sample$GeneSymbol)
```

> We were interested in visualizing fusion distributions that are within 2 different genes which is annotated as "Genic" in our standard fusion format.
> Fusions that are in-frame technically should translate into proteins so we will also filter for only in-frame fusions for visualization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we visualize the distribution of fusions within two different genes that are annotated as "Genic" in our standard fusion format.
Fusions that are in-frame are predicted to translate into protein, so we also filter for only in-frame fusions for visualization.
```

```{r}
putative_driver_fusions <- putative_driver_fusions %>%
  dplyr::bind_rows(QCGeneFiltered_recFusionUniq[, colnames(putative_driver_fusions)]) %>%
  # filter fusions found in more than 4 histologies
  dplyr::filter(
    !FusionName %in% found_in_morethan_4$FusionName,
    # remove intergenic and intragenic fusion
    BreakpointLocation == "Genic",
    Fusion_Type == "in-frame"
  ) %>%
  as.data.frame()

head(putative_driver_fusions)
```

> Recurrent fusions and genes fused provide insigths into subtypes of samples within a cohort. Here we choose broad_histology as the grouping variable and plot the `n` participants (Kids_First_Participant_ID) with these fusions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recurrent fusions and genes fused provide insights into subtypes of samples within a cohort. 
Here we choose `broad_histology` as the grouping variable and plot the `n` participants (Kids_First_Participant_ID) with these fusions. 
```

```{r fig.width=6, fig.height=5}
# recurrently fused genes
plot_recurrent_genes(standardFusioncalls = putative_driver_fusions, 
                     groupby = "broad_histology", 
                     countID = "Kids_First_Participant_ID", 
                     plotn = 20)
```

```{r fig.width=6, fig.height=5}
# recurrent fusions
plot_recurrent_fusions(standardFusioncalls = putative_driver_fusions, 
                       groupby = "broad_histology", 
                       countID = "Kids_First_Participant_ID", 
                       plotn = 20)
```

> The summary of fusions called can provide an overview of the genomic rearrangements within cohort in-terms of intra or inter chromosomal changes and biotypes of genes fused. We also provide distribution of kinase domain retained in 5` and 3` genes as well as overall distribution of annotation in each group. Here we've used broad_histology to graoup our cohorts. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The summary of fusions called can provide an overview of the genomic rearrangements within a cohort in-terms of intra- or inter-chromosomal changes and biotypes of genes fused. 
We also provide a distribution of whether the kinase domain was retained in 5` or 3` genes, as well as an overall distribution of annotation in each group. 
Here we've used `broad_histology` to group our cohorts. 
```

output: 
  html_document:
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
    number_sections: true
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{Putative driver filtering}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}  
  %\VignettePackage{annoFuse}
  %\VignetteKeywords{Software, Transcription, Visualization, GeneExpression, Annotation,
    GeneFusionDetection, GUI, ReportWriting}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE} 
knitr::opts_chunk$set(warning = FALSE, message = FALSE)
```

# Introduction
In this vignette, we demonstrate how to use annoFuse to filter putative oncogenic fusions from a filtered fusion list followed by plotting recurrent fusions, recurrently fused genes, as well as a summary plot. 

# Step by step analysis

We start by loading `annoFuse` and the other required packages in the chunk below

```{r}
library("annoFuse")
suppressPackageStartupMessages(library("readr"))
suppressPackageStartupMessages(library("dplyr"))
suppressPackageStartupMessages(library("qdapRegex"))
```

# Overview of the package
Here, we present annoFuse, an R package developed to annotate and filter expressed gene fusions, along with highlighting artifact filtered novel fusions.

>  * Filtered fusion list `FilteredFusionAnnoFuse.tsv` was obtained from Star-Fusion, arriba and rsem expression (fpkm) files from v16 release of [OpenPBTA](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis) . 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Filtered fusion list `FilteredFusionAnnoFuse.tsv` was obtained from Star-Fusion, arriba and rsem expression (fpkm) files from release-v16-20200320 of [OpenPBTA](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-analysis) . 
```
